\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename hseq.info
@settitle HSeq Description

@ Indexes
@c Modules
@defindex md
@c Functions index
@c @defindex fn
@c Variables index
@c @defindex vr
@c Tactics index
@defindex tc
@c Tacticals index
@defindex tl
@c Convs index
@defindex cv
@c Rules index
@defindex rl

@c %**end of header

@c Local definitions
@include localdefs.texi

@copying
This manual is for @HSeq{}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2005-2016, Matthew Wahab
@end copying

@titlepage
@title @HSeq{} Description
@author Matthew Wahab <@email{mwb.cde@@gmail.com}>

@page
@vskip 0pt plus lfill
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top HSeq Description
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c
@c Front Matter
@c

A theorem prover for higher-logic based on the sequent calculus.

@c @contents

@menu
* Introduction::
@c * Quick Start::
@c * Tactics and Tacticals:: Tactics and Tacticals.
@end menu

@c Indices
@c @menu
@c * Tactics Index:: Tactics Index.
@c * Tacticals Index:: Tacticals Index.
@c * Conversion Index:: Conversion Index.
@c * Rules Index:: Rules Index.
@c * Function Index:: Function Index.
@c * Variable Index:: Variable Index.
@c * Concept Index:: Concept Index.
@c @end menu

@c
@c Chapters
@c

@include intro.texi
@c @include qstart.texi
@c @include tactics.texi

@c
@c Indices
@c

@c
@c Entries convention:
@c Capitalize first word only. No trailing full stop.
@c

@c @node Module Index
@c @unnumbered Module Index
@c @printindex md

@c @node Tactics Index
@c @unnumbered Tactics Index
@c @printindex tc

@c @node Tacticals Index
@c @unnumbered Tacticals Index
@c @printindex tl

@c @node Conversion Index
@c @unnumbered Conversion Index
@c @printindex cv

@c @node Rules Index
@c @unnumbered Rules Index
@c @printindex rl

@c @node Function Index
@c @unnumbered Function Index
@c @printindex fn

@c @node Variable Index
@c @unnumbered Variable Index
@c @printindex vr

@c @node Concept Index
@c @unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@c
@c End of document
@c

@bye
